
Nostalgia 1907

After completing "Cocoron" for the Family Computer, Takeru set out to make their next game much more ambitious and story-centric. It was designed by Kouichi Yotsui, who previously created "Strider" for Capcom. He chose to make the game a text-based adventure as he was a fan of the genre and felt it made for a much more engaging experience compared to the arcade games he was accustom to. The Sharp X68000 was chosen as the platform to produce the game for as the president of Takeru liked it, and as such made it easier for the project to be approved. Inspiration for the game was taken from the 1974 film "The Juggernaut", real-world events such as the Industrial Revolution, and various American spy novels and comic books.

"Nostalgia 1907" was seen by critics as being heavily ambitious and having a unique atmosphere, however it was often criticized for its dialogue and lack of player interactivity, which several said made the game boring or not much fun to play. It was a commercial failure for Takeru and put them in a financial crisis shortly after its release; feeling partially responsible, Yotsui departed Takeru to work for Mitchell Corporation, working on several titles such as "Cannon Dancer". Despite its failure, "Nostalgia 1907" has received a small but dedicated following, and is considered a cult classic. The game's infamous bomb defusal sequence is believed to have been an inspiration for Konami's "Policenauts".

"Nostalgia 1907" is a text-based adventure video game. The story follows Kasuke Yamada, a Japanese man aboard a luxury cruise liner named the Nostalgia during its voyage in the northern Atlantic Ocean. A bomb is detonated and cripples the vessel; the perpetrator reveals himself and requests that he is given an artifact called the Russian Mist, held somewhere within the ship, or a second bomb will be detonated that will sink the ship and kill everybody on board. As the bomb fragments are revealed to be of Japanese origin Yamada is immediately suspected; the player controls Yamada as he must prevent the perpetrator from detonating the second bomb and rescue everybody aboard the ship. Gameplay is accomplished through dialogue trees and interacting with those aboard the Nostalgia, such as conversing with them or playing card games. Speaking with other characters can sometimes provide hints used to progress through the game or to solve puzzles, such as unlocking doors or getting access to a normally unreachable area. Some characters will provide the player with several decisions, which can have drastic effects on later portions of the game. Graphics are done entirely in sepia tones.

After completing their first game "Cocoron" for the Family Computer, Takeru set out to make their next game much more ambitious and story-centric. Directing the project was Kouichi Yotsui, who had previously created the arcade game "Strider" for Capcom. Yotsui wanted the game to be a text-based adventure, as he was a fan of the genre and felt it made for a much longer, more engaging experience than the arcade games he was accustom to. He chose the Sharp X68000 computer as the system the game would be developed for as the president of Takeru was a fan of it, which made it easier for him to get the project approved. Yotsui does not remember the reason he specifically chose the "retro" 1907 setting, saying that it simply came to him while brainstorming ideas.

The storyline was heavily influenced by American spy novels and comic books, as well as real-world events such as the Industrial Revolution. The 1974 film "The Juggernaut" was the inspiration for the game's infamous bomb defusal scenes, as Yotsui thought it would make for an excellent game idea. "The Juggernaut" also served as inspiration for some of the player character's dialogue, which Yotsui claims to be "inheriting culture". Yukie Marikawa composed the soundtrack for the game, and Utata Kiyoshi designed the game's backgrounds, characters and artwork. Marikawa wrote so much music for the game that her boss became disgruntled at Yotsui for making her work so much. "Nostalgia 1907" was released in early 1991 for the Sharp X68000. Versions for both the Sega Mega CD and PC-8801 were released on December 20, 1991, followed by a 1992 FM Towns Marty conversion. The Sega CD version contains full voice acting and higher-quality music.

Reception for "Nostalgia 1907" was mostly mixed. "Famitsu" said that the game had very little interactivity aside from the bomb defusal sequence, which provided a somewhat boring and dull experience. "Beep! MegaDrive" felt that while the game had clear ambition and an unique atmosphere was hampered by awkward dialogue and a large lack of player input, alongside strange puzzle solving and cutscenes that dragged on for too long at times. They also said that the decision making was strange and poorly designed, claiming it felt unrealistic and lacked any sort of challenge. In a more positive light, "Play Magazine" said that the unique atmosphere and mood made "Nostalgia 1907" an interesting title in the text-based adventure game genre, saying it "lives and breathes on the seemingly effortless way it conjures a mood, a wistfulness for a time we weren't alive to experience." They also liked the storyline, saying it was worth investing time into if the player had any knowledge of Japanese. "Sega Saturn Magazine" listed it among the 230 best Sega console games of all time based on reader vote.

"Nostalgia 1907" was a commercial failure for Takeru, placing them in a financial crisis shortly after its release. Feeling partly responsible for the game's underwhelming performance, Kouichi Yotsui left Takeru to join Mitchell Corporation, where he helped design games such as "Chatan Yara Kuushanku" and "Cannon Dancer". Despite its failure, "Nostalgia 1907" has garnered a small but dedicated following in recent years and is considered a cult classic. The game's bomb defusal scenes are believed to have had an influence on Hideo Kojima's "Policenauts", which features a similar destruction sequence.


