
The Kirlian Frequency

The Kirlian Frequency (also known as La Frecuencia Kirlian or Ghost Radio) is an animated webseries from Argentina released in 2017 on YouTube and Vimeo and, since 15 February 2019, exclusively available on Netflix. The series revolves around a radio that broadcasts only at night, in a small town deep inside Buenos Aires Province where all kinds of macabre and supernatural events occur.

Production company Tangram Cine developed an indie-funded live-action pilot in 2009. Although it was severely promoted on their social sites, its post-production was never finished and the pilot never saw the light. It was written and directed by Cristian Ponce and Pedro Saieg.

During the next eight years, the series mutated into different forms and was submitted to several development contests, either as a TV series project or as a feature film.

In 2015, its creator, Cristian Ponce decided to go back to the project, but this time as an animated series. Teaming up with Hernán Bengoa (with whom he had worked on two seasons of webseries "Policompañeros Motorizados"), they gave birth to a new incarnation of the project that was now based in a classic anthological structure, in the style of "Twilight Zone" or "Tales from the Crypt," only tied together by the intervention of its main character, The Host.

The new version was produced by Tangram Cine and Decimu Labs, and was developed almost in its entirety by a four-person crew: Cristian Ponce (screenwriter, director and animator), Hernán Bengoa (screenwriter and illustrator), Hernán Biasotti (sound designer) and Marcelo Cataldo (original soundtrack). It features voice acting by Nicolás Van de Moortele, Casper Uncal, María Duplaá, Letizia Bloisi, Ciro Herce, Milagros Molina and Jorge Alonso.

The series consists of five episodes, originally released once every three months.

"The Kirlian Frequency" takes several elements from classic fantastic films and TV series; for example, the midnight radio trope ("The Fog", "Night Visions", "Pontypool" as fiction examples; and "Coast to Coast AM" and La Mano Peluda in real life); and the "small town / big hell" trope ("Eerie, Indiana", "IT", "Gravity Falls" or "Scarfolk").

During the last few years this same combination has been seen in several productions such as podcast "Welcome to Night Vale" & "King Falls AM" or webcomic "MIdnight Radio".

Halfway through 2018, "The Kirlian Frequency" virtually disappeared from every video platform and social network. Only at the end of January 2019 was its return announced, this time on Netflix, newly dubbed in English and Portuguese for its international release.

"The Kirlian Frequency" won the "Best Script (for an animated webseries)" award in "Bawebfest 2018" Festival.



